.\" z4m-ssh - SSH with zsh4monkey teleportation
.\" Keep in sync with fn/-z4m-cmd-ssh and config.md
.Dd December 29, 2024
.Dt Z4M-SSH 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm z4m ssh
.Nd SSH with zsh4monkey teleportation
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm z4m ssh
.Op Ar ssh-options
.Oo Ar user Ns @ Oc Ns Ar hostname
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
connects to a remote host and automatically installs and configures
zsh4monkey on the remote, transferring local shell configuration and installed
packages to provide a stable remote zsh4monkey shell environment.
.Pp
The teleportation system:
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Uploads a fresh runtime snapshot for the current session
.It
Starts an interactive remote
.Xr zsh 1
without local output-stream rewriting
.It
Supports ProxyJump
.Pq Fl J
for bastion hosts
.It
Works without git, zsh, or sudo on remote
.It
Passes non-interactive SSH invocations through unchanged
.El
.Pp
All standard
.Xr ssh 1
options are supported, including:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl J Ar destination
Connect via jump host (ProxyJump).
Multiple
.Fl J
options can be chained for multi-hop connections.
.It Fl p Ar port
Connect to specified port.
.It Fl i Ar identity_file
Use specified identity file.
.El
.Sh CONFIGURATION
Configuration is done via
.Cm zstyle
commands in
.Pa ~/.zshrc
before
.Cm z4m init .
.Ss Enable/Disable Teleportation
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# Whitelist approach (default: disabled)
zstyle ':z4m:ssh:*'          enable 'no'
zstyle ':z4m:ssh:myserver'   enable 'yes'

# Blacklist approach (enable by default)
zstyle ':z4m:ssh:*'          enable 'yes'
zstyle ':z4m:ssh:production-*' enable 'no'
.Ed
.Pp
Host styles are matched against the SSH target passed to
.Nm
and, when it differs, the resolved
.Cm HostName
as a fallback.
.Ss Extra Files
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# Send additional files to remote
zstyle ':z4m:ssh:*' send-extra-files \
  '~/.nanorc' \
  '--dest my-conf/zsh/.zshrc ~/.zshrc' \
  '--glob .config/nvim/**/*.lua' \
  '--exclude *.tmp ~/.config/nvim'
.Ed
.Pp
Each
.Cm send-extra-files
entry is a single copy spec. Supported forms are a plain local source path,
.Cm --dest
to override the remote path for one resolved source, and
.Cm --glob
to expand the local source as a glob before copying, and
.Cm --exclude
to filter files inside copied directories.
.Pp
Relative local sources are resolved from the local
.Ev HOME .
Relative local sources must not contain
.Ql .
or
.Ql ..
path segments.
Relative remote destinations are placed under the remote
.Ev HOME .
Remote destinations must not contain
.Ql .
or
.Ql ..
path segments.
.Pp
Exclude patterns without
.Ql /
match basenames. Patterns with
.Ql /
match relative paths inside the copied tree.
.Ss Environment Configuration
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# Copy local values, set a literal, and unset one key
zstyle ':z4m:ssh:*' env \
  'EDITOR=_z4m_copy_env_var_' \
  'VISUAL=_z4m_copy_env_var_' \
  'COLORTERM=truecolor' \
  'GIT_DIR'
.Ed
.Pp
Directive rules:
.Ql NAME=value
sets a literal value,
.Ql NAME=
sets an empty value,
.Ql NAME
unsets the variable on the remote side, and
.Ql NAME=_z4m_copy_env_var_
copies the local scalar value if it exists.
.Ql _kitty_copy_env_var_
is also accepted for easier migration from kitty configs.
.Ss Startup Directory
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# Start in remote HOME/src/project
zstyle ':z4m:ssh:*' cwd 'src/project'

# Use an absolute remote path
zstyle ':z4m:ssh:infra' cwd '/srv/app'
.Ed
.Pp
Relative values are resolved from the remote
.Ev HOME .
.Ql ~ ,
.Ql $HOME ,
.Ql ${HOME} ,
.Ql $ZDOTDIR ,
and
.Ql ${ZDOTDIR}
are also accepted.
If the directory cannot be entered,
.Nm
prints a warning and continues with the remote shell's default directory.
.Ss Bootstrap Interpreter
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# Default POSIX shell
zstyle ':z4m:ssh:*' interpreter 'sh'

# Alternate bootstrap shell
zstyle ':z4m:ssh:legacy' interpreter '/bin/bash'
.Ed
.Pp
The
.Cm interpreter
value must be a single executable name or absolute path that can execute POSIX
.Ql sh
syntax.
It only affects the bootstrap step, not the final interactive shell.
.Ss Terminal Configuration
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# Override TERM for compatibility
zstyle ':z4m:ssh:oldserver' term 'screen-256color'

# Custom ssh command
zstyle ':z4m:ssh:*' ssh-command command ssh
.Ed
.Sh EXAMPLES
Basic connection:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
z4m ssh user@host
.Ed
.Pp
Via jump host (bastion):
.Bd -literal -offset indent
z4m ssh -J jumphost user@target
.Ed
.Pp
Multi-hop connection:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
z4m ssh -J jump1 -J jump2 user@target
.Ed
.Pp
With custom port and identity:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
z4m ssh -p 2222 -i ~/.ssh/mykey user@host
.Ed
.Sh SSH CONFIG INTEGRATION
ProxyJump directives in
.Pa ~/.ssh/config
are automatically supported:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
Host target
    HostName target.internal.example.com
    User admin
    ProxyJump bastion.example.com
.Ed
.Pp
Then simply:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
z4m ssh target
.Ed
.Sh BEHAVIOR NOTES
.Nm
is optimized for interactive remote shells.
Forwarding-only or command-execution invocations fall back to the underlying
.Xr ssh 1
command.
Inline autosuggestions are disabled in SSH sessions to avoid remote TTY redraw
corruption.
Syntax highlighting is disabled in SSH sessions to avoid remote TTY redraw
corruption.
Simplified prompt is used in SSH sessions to avoid remote prompt redraw
corruption.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa ~/.ssh/config
SSH client configuration, ProxyJump directives are honored.
.It Pa ~/.ssh/known_hosts
Known host keys.
.It Pa ~/.ssh/s/
ControlMaster socket directory for connection sharing.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr z4m 1 ,
.Xr ssh 1 ,
.Xr ssh_config 5
.Sh AUTHORS
.An arcthur
